New modules docs (#2946)
microsoft/TypeScript-Website: packages/documentation/copy/en/modules-reference/Theory.md

---
title: Theory
layout: docs
permalink: /docs/handbook/modules/theory.html
oneline: How TypeScript models JavaScript modules
translatable: true
---

## Scripts and modules in JavaScript

In the early days of JavaScript, when the language only ran in browsers, there were no modules, but it was still possible to split the JavaScript for a web page into multiple files by using multiple `script` tags in HTML:

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script src="a.js"></script>
    <script src="b.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body></body>
</html>
```

This approach had some downsides, especially as web pages grew larger and more complex. In particular, all scripts loaded onto the same page share the same scope—appropriately called the “global scope”—meaning the scripts had to be very careful not to overwrite each others’ variables and functions.

> Any system that solves this problem by giving files their own scope while still providing a way to make bits of code available to other files can be called a “module system.” (It may sound obvious to say that each file in a module system is called a “module,” but the term is often used to contrast with _script_ files, which run outside a module system, in a global scope.)

Reviewer: The opening line for this paragraph feels a little unwieldy (lots of abstract terms) when you try say it out loud could try starting with the term and then building backwards?

```suggestion
We call a system which tries to break up that single global scope a “module system“, these are usually build around providing a per-file scope which allows for ways to pass bits of code between each other. (It may sound obvious to say that each file in a module system is called a “module,” but the term is often used to contrast with _script_ files, which run outside a module system, in a global scope.)
```

```ts
// @moduleResolution: node16
// @rootDir: src
// @outDir: dist

// @Filename: src/math.mts
export function add(a: number, b: number) {
  return a + b;
}

// @Filename: src/main.mts
import { add } from "./math.mjs";
add(1, 2);
```

Node.js ESM `import` declarations use a strict module resolution algorithm that requires relative paths to include file extensions. When we only think about input files, it’s a little strange that `"./math.mjs"` seems to resolve to `math.mts`. Since we’re using an `outDir` to put compiled outputs in a different directory, `math.mjs` doesn’t even exist next to `main.mts`! Why should this resolve? With our new mental model, it’s no problem:

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph Output files
    dist/main.mjs
    style dist/main.mjs stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    dist/math.mjs
    style dist/math.mjs stroke-dasharray: 5 5
  end
  subgraph Input files
    src/main.mts
    src/math.mts
  end
  src/main.mts -. Map to output .-> dist/main.mjs
  dist/main.mjs -- "#quot;./math.mjs#quot;" --> dist/math.mjs
  dist/math.mjs -. Map to input .-> src/math.mts
```

> Understanding this mental model may not immediately eliminate the strangeness of seeing output file extensions in input files, and it’s natural to think in terms of shortcuts: “`"./math.mjs"` refers to the input file `math.mts`. I have to write the output extension, but the compiler knows to look for `.mts` when I write `.mjs`.” This shortcut is even how the compiler works internally, but the more robust mental model explains _why_ module resolution in TypeScript works this way: given the constraint that the module specifier in the output file will be [the same](#module-specifiers-are-not-transformed) as the module specifier in the input file, this is the only process that accomplishes our two goals of validating output files and assigning types.

Reviewer: This sentence felt a bit iffy because of the intermixed double quotes, it could be solved by italicising?

```suggestion
Understanding this mental model may not immediately eliminate the strangeness of seeing output file extensions in input files, and it’s natural to think in terms of shortcuts: _“`"./math.mjs"` refers to the input file `math.mts`. I have to write the output extension, but the compiler knows to look for `.mts` when I write `.mjs`.”_ This shortcut is even how the compiler works internally, but the more robust mental model explains _why_ module resolution in TypeScript works this way: given the constraint that the module specifier in the output file will be [the same](#module-specifiers-are-not-transformed) as the module specifier in the input file, this is the only process that accomplishes our two goals of validating output files and assigning types.
```

```ts
export * from "./utils";
```

Assuming `./utils.ts` (or `./utils/index.ts`) exists, a bundler would be fine with this code, so `"moduleResolution": "bundler"` doesn’t complain. Compiled with `"module": "esnext"`, the output JavaScript for this export statement will look exactly the same as the input. If that JavaScript were published to npm, it would be usable by projects that use a bundler, but it would cause an error when run in Node.js:

```
Error [ERR_MODULE_NOT_FOUND]: Cannot find module '.../node_modules/dependency/utils' imported from .../node_modules/dependency/index.js
Did you mean to import ./utils.js?

> ```

Reviewer: You have the ability to [inline custom errors](https://shikijs.github.io/twoslash/playground?#code/MYewdgziA2CmB0sBOSRIBQCIBysCWAFgAQEgCumAlAFAD0tRAAsqkgFxG6EnlA) if you want
